ARTICLE IV. - NOISE CONTROL[4]



Footnotes:

--- (4) ---

Editor's note—Ord. No. 14,746, § 1, adopted Feb. 25, 2008, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 42-246—42-
270, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to noise pollution and
derived from Code 1975, §§ 16-136—16-153, as amended. See the Code Comparative Table for
complete derivation.



Sec. 42-246. - Definitions.

     Definitions of technical terms used in this article which are not defined in this section shall be
obtained from publications of acoustical terminology issued by the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) or its successor body. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
     "Adverse impact" shall mean such a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary care and
prudence to conclude that the economic, entertainment and philanthropic benefits to the community do
not reasonably outweigh the quiet use and enjoyment of the affected property.
     "Ambient sound level" means the noise associated with a given environment, exclusive of a
particular noise being tested, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources near and far,
exclusive of intruding noises from isolated identifiable sources.
    "A-weighted sound level" means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level
meter using the A-weighting network. The level is designated dB(a) or dBA.
     "Construction" means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or
similar action for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.
    "Decibel (dB)" means a logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure often used in describing the
amplitude of sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 miscropascals (20 micronewtons per square
meter).
     "Demolition" means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public
or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property.
    "Emergency" means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical or
psychological trauma or property damage which demands immediate action.
    "Emergency work" means any work performed for the purpose of alleviating or resolving an
emergency.
    "Equivalent A-weighted sound level (Leq)" means the constant sound level that, in a given situation
and time period, conveys the same sound energy as the actual time-varying A-weighted sound. For the
purpose of this article, a time period of one hour shall be used, unless the likely duration or intensity of the
sound being measured makes a shorter time period reasonable.
     "Impulsive sound" means sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt
onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts,
and the discharge of firearms.



                                                                                                        Page 1
     "Motorboat" means any vessel which operates on water and which is propelled by a motor, including
but not limited to boats, barges, amphibious craft, water ski towing devices and hovercraft.
      "Motorcycle" means any motor vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of the rider and designed
to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground. The term includes motorized bicycles
and motor scooters.
     "Motor vehicle" means any motor-operated vehicle licensed for use on the public highways, but not
including a motorcycle.
    "Noise" means any sound which disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse
psychological or physiological effect on humans.
    "Noise disturbance" means:
    (1) Any sound which unreasonably endangers or injures the health or safety or welfare of a human
        being; or
    (2) Any sound which unreasonably disturbs a person of normal sensitivities; or
    (3) Any sound which unreasonably devalues or injures personal or real property; or
    (4) Any sound which is in excess of decibel levels set forth in this article.
    (5) The factors which may be considered in determining whether a noise disturbance exists may
        include, but are not limited to:
         a.   The level of the noise;
         b.   The level and intensity of any background noise;
         c.   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
         d.   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;
         e.   The proximity of the source of the noise to sleeping facilities;
         f.   The land use, nature and zoning of the area from which the noise emanates and of the
              area where the noise is received;
         g.   The time of day or night when the noise occurs;
         h.   The duration of the noise;
         i.   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.
     "Noise sensitive area" means any area designated pursuant to section 42-263 of this article for the
purpose of ensuring exceptional quiet and clearly posted with noise sensitive area signs, because of the
noise sensitive activities conducted therein.
    "Notice of violation" shall include a notice of violation, a civil infraction and/or a criminal citation.
     "Person" shall have the meaning prescribed by section 1-2 of this Code and, in addition, means and
includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of the state or any political
subdivision of the state.
    "Person responsible" or "responsible party" shall be the owners, employees or acting managers,
agents, contract buyers, tenants, or lessees' of all residential dwellings, commercial establishments,
and/or real estate upon which a violation of this article is found and shall be jointly and severally
responsible for compliance with this article at any location.
     "Powered model vehicle" means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or land borne model plane,
vessel, or vehicle, which is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to any model airplane,
boat, car or rocket.
     "Public right-of-way" means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, or alley or similar
place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.


                                                                                                            Page 2
     "Public space" means any real property, including any structure thereon, which is owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.
     "Pure tone" means any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or a set of single
pitches.
     "Real property boundary" means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical
extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person,
but not including intra-building real property divisions.
    "Receiving land" means the use or occupancy of the property which receives the transmission of
sound as defined in this section.
      "Recreational vehicle" means any race car, motorcycle, snowmobile, all terrain vehicles or any other
motorized vehicle equipped for use in racing or other recreational events or uses off of public rights-of-
way on public or private property. For purposes of this article, a motor vehicle or motorized vehicle which
is taking part in an organized racing, endurance, or other coordinated sporting event shall be deemed a
recreational vehicle and shall be governed by the terms of subsection 42-259(c) of this article.
      "Residential" means any property on which is located a building or structure used wholly or partially
for living or sleeping purposes. This definition shall not include park custodial residences or school or
college dormitories.
     "Sound" means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical
parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium. The
description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and
frequency.
     "Sound equipment" means any radio, record player, stereo, television, tape deck or player,
loudspeaker, amplifier, sound truck or other device for producing, reproducing, or amplifying sounds.
     "Sound level" means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter
and frequency weighting network as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for
sound level meters. If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
     "Sound level meter" means an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector,
integrator or time averager, output or display meter, and weighting networks used to measure sound
pressure levels, which complies with American National Standards Institute standards.

(O.14,746)

Sec. 42-247. - Title.

     This article may be cited as the "Noise Control Ordinance of the City of Des Moines."

(O.14,746)

Sec. 42-248. - Statement of public policy.

     The city council finds and declares that:
     (1) Excessive noise is a serious hazard to the public health and welfare and the quality of life in a
         close urban society.
     (2) A substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive noise can be
         substantially abated without serious inconvenience to the public.
     (3) Certain noise-producing equipment in this community is essential to the quality of life in the
         community and should be allowed to continue at reasonable levels with moderate regulation.



                                                                                                    Page 3
     (4) Each person has a right to an environment reasonably free from noise which jeopardizes health
         or welfare or unnecessarily degrades the quality of life.
     (5) It is the policy of this city to promote an environment free from excessive noise, which
         unnecessarily jeopardizes the health and welfare and degrades the quality of the lives of the
         residents of this community, without unduly prohibiting, limiting or otherwise regulating the
         function of certain noise-producing equipment which is not amenable to such controls and yet is
         essential to the economy and quality of life of the community.

(O.14,746)

Sec. 42-249. - Purpose.

      The purpose of this article is to establish standards for the control of excessive noise in the city by
setting maximum permissible sound levels for various activities to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare.

(O.14,746)

Sec. 42-250. - Scope.

    This article shall apply to the control of all noise originating within the city limits or originating from
properties lying outside the city limits owned or controlled by the city, except where either:
     (1) A state or federal agency has adopted a different standard or rule than that prescribed within
         this article and has so preempted the regulation of noise from a particular source as to render
         this article inapplicable thereto; or
     (2) The city council has determined that, because of public acceptance of the activity producing a
         particular noise, such noise is deemed acceptable to the city residents.

(O.14,746)

Sec. 42-251. - Exceptions to article.

     This article shall not apply to the following:
     (1) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency.
     (2) The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
     (3) Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any private
         property, public space, or public right-of-way, except those activities controlled by section 42-
         257 of this article.
     (4) The un-amplified human voice, except those activities controlled by subsection 42-256(a) of this
         article.
     (5) Agricultural activities, exclusive of those involving the ownership or possession of animals or
         birds.
     (6) Snowmobiles regulated by I.C. ch. 321G.
     (7) Rail and air transportation and public mass transportation vehicles.
     (8) The emission of sound in connection with activities conducted on the state fairgrounds during
         the annual state fair and exposition.




                                                                                                       Page 4
    (9) The emission of sound in the performance of military operations, exclusive of travel by
        individuals to or from military duty.
    (10) The emission of sound in the legal discharge of weapons or in fireworks displays licensed by
         the city.
    (11) The emission of sound in the operation of snow removal equipment.
    (12) Parades or processions for which a parade permit has been issued by the city.
    (13) Marching bands and athletic events
    (14) Government owned, operated, or contracted vehicles in the performance of their official duties.

(O.14,746)

Sec. 42-252. - Noise disturbance prohibited.

      No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any noise disturbance as defined
in this article.

(O.14,746)

Sec. 42-253. - Ambient noise level.

    When noise level measurements are taken and the ambient noise level measurement exceeds the
maximum permitted sound level, the maximum permitted sound level shall be increased to equal the
ambient noise level.

(O.14,746)

_____

Sec. 42-254. - Maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land use; immediate threat.

(a) Maximum permissible sound levels. With the exception of sound levels elsewhere specifically
    authorized or allowed in this article, no person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or
    continued, any sound which exceeds the following sound level limits at or within the real property
    boundary of a receiving land use:

                              Table 1. Sound Levels By Receiving Land Use

    Zoning Category of Receiving Land Use                   Time                Sound Level Limit, dBA

                                                   7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.                 60
              Residential zones:
   R1-80 to R-6,R-HD and a residential PUD
                                                   10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.                 50

        Mixed use and commercial zones:
                                                         At all times                      65
                   PUD to C-4




                                                                                                  Page 5
               Industrial zones:
                                                         At all times                      75
                 M-1 to M-3

              Noise sensitive area                       At all times                      55

        U-1 floodplain or FW floodway                    At all times                      65




    (1) For the purposes of this article, sound levels in excess of the dBA listed in table 1 shall be
        deemed a violation.
    (2) This subsection shall not apply to:
         a.   Activities covered by the following sections of this article: 42-255 (emergency signaling
              devices); 42-259 (motorized vehicles); 42-260 (construction); 42-261 (stationary non-
              emergency signaling devices); 42-266 (noise covered by sound variance).
         b.   The operation of the following domestic power tools or equipment between the hours of
              7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.:
              1.   Electrical power tools.
              2.   Motor-powered, muffler-equipped lawn, garden and tree trimming equipment.
(b) Immediate threat.
    (1) The official of any department charged with enforcement of this article shall order an immediate
        halt to any sound which exposes any person, except those excluded under subsection (2) of
        this section, to continuous sound levels in excess of those shown in table 2 or to impulsive
        sound levels in excess of those shown in table 3. If the sound has not abated within a
        reasonable length of time following issuance of such an order, the official of any department
        charged with enforcement of this article may apply to the appropriate court for an injunction to
        replace the order or may treat the violation in the manner of other Code violations.
    (2) No order under subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be issued if the only persons exposed to
        sound levels in excess of those listed in tables 2 and 3 are exposed as a result of:
         a.   Trespass;
         b.   Invitation upon private property by the person causing or permitting the sound; or
         c.   Employment by the person or contractor of the person causing or permitting the sound.
    (3) Any person subject to an order issued pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section shall comply
        with such order until:
         a.   The sound is brought into compliance with the order as determined by the noise control
              division; or
         b.   A judicial order has superseded such order.

       Table 2. Continuous Sound Levels Which Pose an Immediate Threat to Health and Welfare
                                        (Measured at 50 Feet)

                        Sound Level Limit (dBA)                                     Duration



                                                                                                   Page 6
                                  90                                             24 hours

                                  93                                             12 hours

                                  96                                                6 hours

                                  99                                                3 hours

                                  102                                           1.5 hours

                                  105                                          45 minutes

                                  108                                          22 minutes




    (4) Correction for character of sound. For any source of sound which emits a pure tone, the
        maximum sound level limits set forth in table 2 shall be reduced by five dBA.
    (5) Varying sound level. Where the sound level (dBA) varies over the measuring period, the
        equivalent A-weighted (average) sound level (Leq) shall be determined by figuring the time and
        intensity levels for time periods set out in tables 2 and 3.

 Table 3. Impulsive Sound Levels Which Pose an Immediate Threat to Health and Welfare (Measured at
                                              50 Feet)

                                                                           Number of
                   Sound Level Limit (dB)                                Repetitions per
                                                                         24-Hour Period

                            140                                                 1

                            130                                                10

                            120                                                100




(O.14,746, 14,774)

Sec. 42-255. - Emergency signaling devices.




                                                                                               Page 7
(a) No person shall operate or permit the intentional sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar, or civil
    defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency
    purposes or for testing, as provided in subsection (b) of this section.
(b) Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall occur at the same time of day each time the
    test is performed, but not before 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. Any such testing shall use only the
    minimum cycle test time. In no case shall test times exceed 60 seconds.

(O.14,746)

Sec. 42-256. - Specific activities prohibited.

(a) Sales by hawking or barking. No person shall offer for sale or sell anything by shouting or raised
    voice within any residential or commercial area in the city.
(b) Loading and unloading. No person shall so load, unload, open, close or handle boxes, crates,
    containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and
    6:00 a.m. the following morning as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property
    boundary or within a noise sensitive area. This subsection shall not apply to the engine noise
    generated by the activities regulated by section 42-259 of this article.
(c) Vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing. No person shall repair, rebuild, modify, or test any motor
    vehicle, motorcycle, or motorboat in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
    residential real property boundary or outdoors within a noise sensitive area.
(d) Powered model vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the operation of powered model vehicles
    in a public or private space out-of-doors or within a noise sensitive area between the hours of 10:00
    p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.

(O.14,746, 14,976)

Sec. 42-257. - Musical instruments and similar devices.

     No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any drum, musical instrument or
similar device which produces sound in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a
residential real property boundary as defined in section 42-254 of this article or outdoors within a noise
sensitive area.

(O.14,746)

Sec. 42-258. - Sound equipment, sound amplifying equipment and construction equipment.

(a) Permit required. No person shall, use, operate or cause to be used or operated any sound
    equipment or tools or equipment used in construction activities beyond the hours permitted under
    section 42-260 of this article upon the public right-of-way or in any building or upon any premises,
    public or private, creating a noise disturbance unless such person:
     (1) First obtains a permit in accordance with this section;
     (2) Complies with the conditions imposed by the permit, including the maximum permitted sound
         level shown therein;
     (3) Complies with the provisions of chapter 102 of this Code, as it regulates street closings; and
     (4) Complies with all other applicable subsections of this section.
(b) "Sound equipment" requiring a permit shall not include:



                                                                                                    Page 8
    (1) Equipment used for public health and safety purposes.
    (2) Church or clock carillons, bells or chimes.
    (3) Automobile or boat radios, tape decks or players, or other standard equipment used and
        intended for the use and enjoyment of the vehicle occupants, provided the sound emitting there
        from does not create a noise disturbance or does not violate section 42-259.
    (4) Un-amplified live music provided, sponsored, or funded, in whole or in part, by a governmental
        entity.
(c) Permit fees. A separate permit shall be required for each type of activity described in subsection (e)
    of this section, and permits shall be nontransferable. The permit shall be conspicuously displayed on
    or immediately adjacent to the sound equipment. A nonrefundable fee shall be paid in the amount
    set in the schedule of fees adopted by the city council by resolution at the time of application for the
    sound permit.
(d) Information required on permit application. Application for the permit required in this section shall be
    made in writing to the zoning enforcement officer, accompanied by the required permit fee and the
    following information:
    (1) The type of permit requested.
    (2) The name and address of the applicant.
    (3) The purpose for which the sound equipment will be used.
    (4) The location where the sound equipment will be used.
    (5) Designation of the days of use and proposed hours of operation of the sound equipment.
    (6) A general description of the sound equipment, including the license number of any motor
        vehicle upon which it is to be operated.
    (7) The name(s) and phone number(s) of the person(s) responsible for the use of the permit.
If the application contains the required information and is accompanied by the required fee, and the
proposed use of the sound equipment complies with the standards and other requirements of this section
and all other applicable laws and ordinances, the zoning enforcement officer shall issue the appropriate
permit.

(e) Application standards. The following are general standards for the type of permit:
    (1) Type "A" permit. A type "A" permit may be issued for sound equipment emitting music or human
        speech registering not more than 85 dBAs when measured at the real property boundary of the
        permitted property or at a distance of 50 feet from the sound equipment if issued in conjunction
        with a street closing. A type "A" permit may be issued only in areas of the city zoned for
        commercial and/or mixed use and only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., except
        the C-3, C-3A, C-3B, C-3R and DR zoned areas which shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
        and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:30 a.m.
        on Friday and Saturday, the Sunday of Memorial Day weekend, Labor Day weekend and the
        Fourth of July should it fall on a Sunday. A type "A" permit will be issued for a thirty day period
        to be used on eight days during the permitted time, with the days of use to be designated on the
        permit application.
    (2) Type "B" permit—Parks located in residential zones. A type "B" permit may be used for sound
        equipment emitting music or human speech registering not more than 65 dBAs when measured
        at the real property boundary or at a distance of 50 feet from the sound equipment, whichever
        distance is closer to the sound equipment. Sound equipment permitted under a type "B" permit
        may be used only in public parks owned and operated by the city or public grounds owned and
        operated by another governmental body, located in a residentially zoned district from 9:00 a.m.
        to the time the park closes for events authorized and approved by the park and recreation board



                                                                                                     Page 9
    or other body having jurisdiction over the park or public grounds. A type "B" permit will be
    issued for one day up to one week with the days to be designated on the permit application.
(3) Type "C" permit—Church or school grounds. A type "C" permit may be issued for sound
    equipment emitting music or human speech registering not more than 65 dBAs when measured
    at the real property boundary or when measured at a distance of 50 feet from the sound
    equipment, whichever distance is closer to the sound equipment. Sound equipment permitted
    under a type "C" permit may be used only on church grounds, school grounds, or in conjunction
    with a school sponsored activity, from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. for events authorized and
    approved by the church or school authorities having jurisdiction of the grounds. A type "C"
    permit will be issued for one day up to one week with the days to be designated on the permit
    application.
(4) Type "D" permit—Residential events. A type "D" permit may be issued for sound equipment
    emitting music or human speech registering not more than 65 dBAs when measured at the real
    property boundary of the permitted property or 50 feet from the sound equipment, whichever
    distance is closer. Sound equipment permitted under a type "D" permit may be used only
    pursuant to a permitted street closing under chapter 102 of this Code, from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
    p.m. A type "D" permit will be issued for one day up to one week with the days to be designate
    on the permit application.
(5) Type "E" permit—Background sound equipment. A type "E" permit may be issued for a
    commercially zoned area or a commercially zoned PUD or PBP area for sound equipment to be
    used in an outdoor area in conjunction with an approved business use emitting music or human
    speech, excluding live music, registering not more then 65 dBAs, or below the ambient level,
    when measured at the property boundary, edge of designated seating area or 50 feet from the
    sound equipment which ever is closer. Sound equipment permitted under a type "E" permit may
    be used only during regular hours of business operation. A type "E" permit will be issued up to
    one year.
(6) Type "F" permit—Simon Estes Riverfront Amphitheater and Brenton Skating Plaza. A type "F"
    permit may be issued for sound equipment to be used, either in the Simon Estes Riverfront
    Amphitheater or the Brenton Skating Plaza, in conjunction with a lease agreement entered into
    with the Parks and Recreation Department, emitting music or human speech, registering not
    more than 100 dBAs, when measured at the middle cement crosswalk area of the amphitheater
    or 50 feet from the sound equipment at the skating plaza. This permit is effective between the
    hours of 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 9:00 a.m. to 12:30 a.m. on
    Friday and Saturday, the Sunday of Memorial Day weekend, Labor Day weekend and the
    Fourth of July should it fall on a Sunday.
(7) Type "G" permit—Special event live performances. A type "G" permit may be issued for sound
    amplification equipment to be used for live performances where the sound from music or human
    speech does not exceed 100 dBAs when measured 50 feet from the amplification equipment
    and meets all of the following criteria:
    a.   The special event or live performance is located in a C-3, C-3A, C-3B, C-3R or RD zoned
         district,
    b.   This type permit will only be issued two times per year per address to include a street
         closing abutting the sponsoring business and only if 30 days has elapsed from the effective
         date of a previous type "G" permit for the same location, however, if the street closing is
         sponsored by the Court Avenue Business Association, Downtown Community Alliance,
         Historic East Village, or any other community organization affiliated with businesses
         located in the C-3, C-3A, C-3B, C-3R or RD zoned districts this type permit is not limited in
         number or time span,
    c.   If the applicant has no address in the C-3, C-3A, C-3B, C-3R or RD zoned district, then
         either a business in the properly zoned district, or a community organization affiliated with




                                                                                             Page 10
               businesses located in the C-3, C-3A, C-3B, C-3R or RD zoned districts must sponsor the
               event,
          d.   This type permit may not be issued if another type "G" permit has already been issued
               within 1,000 feet of a given location and covering the same time on any day.
          e.   When used in conjunction with a street closure this type permit will not be issued until the
               street use team approves the street closure,
          f.   This type permit must be obtained at least seven days prior to the performance unless
               pending street use team approval.
          g.   This type permit is effective for one or two days in succession and for the hours of 9:00
               a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 9:00 a.m. to 12:30 a.m. on Friday and
               Saturday, the Sunday of Memorial Day weekend, Labor Day weekend and the Fourth of
               July should it fall on a Sunday.
          h.   A variance may be sought in accordance with this article if any of the requirements for
               issuance of this type permit wish to be modified on a case by case basis.
      (8) Type "H" permit—Farmer's Market. A type "H" permit may be issued to Farmer's Markets which
          have a street closure for sound amplification equipment allowing music up to 85 dBA's for the
          duration of the street closure.
      (9) Type "I" permit—Waterworks Park. A type "I" permit may be issued for amplification equipment
          for live performances held in Waterworks Park, emitting music or human speech, at a level not
          greater than 85 decibels when measured at the nearest residence. A type "I" permit is effective
          for one or two days and for the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday,
          and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday, the Sunday of
          Memorial Day weekend, Labor Day weekend and the Fourth of July should it fall on a Sunday.
          Additionally the stage and sound equipment shall be set up facing the northeast causing the
          sound to be directed through the park and away from residential areas.
      (10) Type "J" permit—Night construction. A type "J" permit may be issued for residential construction
           activities beyond the hours permitted under section 42-260. A type "J" permit may be issued for
           construction performed on behalf of a nonprofit or philanthropic organization where such
           construction activity is to be completed in an expedited manner pursuant to a construction
           schedule which has been approved by the community development director and has been
           determined to advance the overall welfare of city residents, provided that the residential
           structure is being built for occupation by low or moderate income persons. Application for a type
           "J" permit shall be processed pursuant to sections 42-264 through 42-267 of this article.
(f)   Commercial advertising. No sound equipment shall be permitted to be used on public streets or
      public places or in any building or upon any premises if the sound may be plainly audible from any
      public street or public place within the city when any such use is for commercial advertising purposes
      or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure for monetary
      gain.
(h) Denial or revocation.
      (1) Denial of sound permit. The director of the community development department may, upon
          hearing, deny an application for a sound permit and shall forward the information relied upon to
          the city clerk to schedule a hearing for consideration of denial using the following criteria and
          standards:
          a.   Whether police have stopped activities sponsored by the same applicant or in the same
               location for public safety purposes such as riot, disorderly conduct or other crimes;
          b.   Whether the sponsor, applicant, or their employees have violated the Des Moines
               Municipal Code at past events requiring a sound permit;




                                                                                                   Page 11
         c.   Whether the applicant(s) have paid the city all fees due and owing under any chapter of the
              Des Moines Municipal Code; and
         d.   If any person responsible for monitoring the terms and conditions of the sound permit at
              the premises has been issued two or more notices of violation of this article in a previous
              12 month period.
    (2) Revocation. The director of the community development department may, upon hearing, revoke
        a sound permit issued pursuant to this article upon the second notice of violation issued in a 12-
        month period to persons responsible for monitoring the terms and conditions of the sound
        permit, the director shall forward the information to the city clerk to schedule a hearing for
        consideration of revocation of the sound permit.
    (3) Revocation hearing-adverse impact. If the director of the community development department
        receives written statements or a petition from 25 percent or more of the occupants of single
        family or duplex residences and the owner or manager of multiple residence structures including
        hotels, who claim to be adversely affected by the operation of sound amplification equipment
        under a valid sound permit and who live within 200 feet measured from property line to property
        line of the property where such sound permit is valid, the director shall forward the information
        to the city clerk to schedule a hearing for consideration of revocation of the sound permit.

(O.14,746, 14,752, 14,774, 14,868, 15,237)

Sec. 42-259. - Motorized vehicles.

(a) No person shall operate the engine, or auxiliary engine, of a motor vehicle with a manufacturer's
    gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more for a period longer than 20 minutes while such
    vehicle is standing and located within 150 feet of property zoned and used for residential purposes.
    This subsection shall not apply to delivery or pickup vehicles that require the operation of the engine
    to unload or load their vending loads.
(b) No person shall operate a motor vehicle or a combination of vehicles of a type subject to registration
    at any time or under any condition in such manner as to exceed the noise limit listed in this
    subsection for the category of motor vehicle, such noise to be measured at a distance of 50 feet from
    the vehicle.

                               Noise Limit In Relation To Legal Speed Limit

                                                                                              35
                                                                                                      Over
                                                                                             mph
                                                                                                       35
                                      Type of Vehicle                                         or
                                                                                                      mph
                                                                                             Less
                                                                                                      dBA
                                                                                             dBA

  Any motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 lbs. or
                                                                                              88       92
         more and any combination of vehicles towed by such motor vehicle

                                     Any motorcycle                                           82       86

  Any other motor vehicle and any combination of motor vehicles towed by such motor
                                                                                              76       82
                                       vehicle



                                                                                                    Page 12
This subsection applies to the total noise from a vehicle or combination of vehicles and shall not be
construed as limiting or precluding the enforcement of any other section of this Code relating to motor
vehicle mufflers or noise control.

(c) (1) No person shall operate a recreational vehicle or permit the operation of one or more
        recreational vehicles, individually or in a group, or in an organized racing event on public or
        private property in such a manner that the sound level exceeds that set forth in Section 42-
        254(a) Table 1.
    (2) No person shall operate or permit the operation of any recreational vehicle(s), on public or
        private land between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
    (3) This section shall not apply to recreational vehicles when legally operated upon the public
        streets.
(d) No person operating or in control of a motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, watercraft, or vessel shall
    operate or permit the operation of a sound system in the vehicle so as to produce a vibration or
    sound that is clearly detectable at a distance of 50 feet from the vehicle between the hours of 7:00
    a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or clearly detectable at a distance of 25 feet from the vehicle between the hours
    of 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(e) No person operating or in control of a garbage truck or other motor vehicle engaged in the business
    of solid waste collection, shall use such vehicle to pick up or empty a dumpster or other container
    used for the collection or storage of solid at any location in, or within 150 feet of, an R district or
    portion of a PUD district restricted to residential use, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
    the following morning, subject to the following:
    (1) Trash pickup at elementary and secondary schools and hospitals is exempt from this
        requirement.
    (2) The city manager or the city manager's designee may grant an exception to this limitation on
        the timing of trash pickup where such exception is necessary to avoid an unreasonable risk of
        harm created by the unusual circumstances of the site. Any such exception may be subject to
        reasonable conditions imposed to minimize the detrimental impact of granting such exception,
        and shall be subject to reconsideration in the event of changed circumstances.

(O.14,746, 14,752, 14,976)

Sec. 42-260. - Construction.

     No person shall operate or permit the operation of any tools or equipment in construction, drilling or
demolition work or in preventive maintenance work for public service utilities between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(O.14,746)

Sec. 42-261. - Stationary non-emergency signaling devices.

(a) No person shall operate or permit the sounding of any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar
    device, intended primarily for non-emergency purposes, from any place for more than one minute in
    any hourly period.
(b) Devices used in conjunction with places of religious worship shall be exempt from the operation of
    this section.




                                                                                                   Page 13
(O.14,746)

Sec. 42-262. - Animals and birds.

     No person shall own, possess or harbor any animal or bird which frequently or for continued duration
emits sounds native to the species which are a noise disturbance across a residential real property
boundary or within a noise sensitive area.

(O.14,746)

Sec. 42-263. - Enforcement.

(a) The noise control program established by this article shall be implemented, administered, and
    enforced by the community development and police departments.
(b) The sections of this article which prohibit the making, continuing, or causing the making or continuing
    of a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or within a noise sensitive area shall be
    enforced upon receipt of complaint made or filed with city officials by a person disturbed by such
    noise disturbance or by direction of the chief of police or his or her designee. Certification by an
    official charged with enforcement of this article that such complaint was made shall be sufficient to
    establish the fact of such complaint.
(c) To implement and enforce this article, the community development department and the police
    department shall have the additional power to:
    (1) Conduct research, monitoring, and other studies related to sound.
    (2) Upon presentation of proper credentials, enter and inspect any private property or place and
        inspect any report or records at any reasonable time when granted permission by the owner or
        by some other person with apparent authority to act for the owner.
    (3) Issue sound variances pursuant to section 42-264 of this article.
    (4) Deny sound permits or seek a revocation of a sound permit.
    (5) Prepare recommendations for consideration by the city council, after publication of notice and
        public hearing, for establishing the boundaries of noise sensitive areas.
    (6) The sound source or any component thereof may be impounded pending the resolution of any
        violations charged under this article.
(d) The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound level meter meeting the standards
    prescribed by the American National Standards Institute or its successor body. Measurements shall
    be taken so as to be in compliance with the specifications for a valid test as set out by the product
    manufacture. Training will be administered by the product manufacture representative or any
    departmental employee(s) who has attended such training.

(O.14,746)

Sec. 42-264. - Application for sound variances or type "J" permits.

(a) Any person desiring to exceed the standard conditions of any type of permit as set out in this article
    may apply to the community development department for a variance from such conditions. An
    application for a type "J" permit under section 42-458 shall be processed as a variance as set forth in
    this section.




                                                                                                  Page 14
(b) All applicants for such variances shall apply in writing to the community development department.
    The application shall be submitted at least 30 days prior to the proposed date for the needed sound
    permit variance.
(c) All variance applications shall contain the following information:
      (1) The name and address of the applicant;
      (2) If the application is made on behalf of an organization, the name and address of that
          organization;
      (3) The name and phone number of a contact person;
      (4) The proposed dates for which a variance is required;
      (5) A description of the event and the terms and conditions of the requested variance;
      (6) Information which would demonstrate that complying with the standard conditions for the permit
          to be issued would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or
          on other persons.
(d) An application for a sound permit variance shall be submitted to the community development
    department accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $100.00 to cover the cost of processing the
    application.
(e) Upon receipt of an application for a sound permit variance, the director of the community
    development department or his or her designee shall determine what property interests may be
    affected by the granting of a sound permit variance, including but not limited to:
      (1) The occupants of surrounding residences and businesses within 250 feet of the noise source; or
      (2) The owner or manager of multiple-residence structures, including hotels, within such areas.
(f)   The director of the community development department shall notify such property owners or
      occupants as identified in subsection (e) of this section in writing and delivered by the U.S. Postal
      Service, ordinary mail, of the application for a sound permit variance and shall give them ten days to
      give written cause why the variance should not be granted.
(g) If the director of the community development department receives written statements from 25
    percent or more occupants who claim to be adversely affected by allowance of the sound permit
    variance, the director shall forward the information to the city clerk to schedule an administrative
    hearing to consider the application for a variance.
(h) If the application for variance is not set for hearing before the administrative hearing officer an
    administrative decision shall be made in writing and shall be sent to the applicant by regular U.S.
    mail. The decision will either grant the variance with conditions as deemed appropriate under the
    circumstances or deny the requested variance stating the reason for denial. The applicant or any
    person claiming to be adversely affected by such decision may appeal the determination to the city
    council by notifying the city clerk's office within seven days of the date of the decision.

(O.14,746, 14,774, 14,868)

Sec. 42-265. - Scheduling of hearing on sound variances denials and revocations.

     Upon receipt from the director of the community development department of a request for a hearing
on a sound variance or from any person who may appeal an administrative decision, or when a sound
permit is denied or revocation is sought the city clerk shall schedule a hearing as soon as is practical and
shall send by the regular U.S. Postal Service a notice of the time, date and location of the hearing to the
applicant, the permit holder and/or all persons who filed an adverse impact statement and all property
owners previously notified with copy to the community development department at least ten days prior to
the hearing.



                                                                                                   Page 15
(O.14,746, 14,774)

Sec. 42-266. - Conduct of administrative hearing on sound variances denials and permit revocations.

(a) The administrative hearing shall be conducted before the hearing officer designated by the city
    manager.
     (1) Variance. The sole issue before the hearing officer shall be whether the granting of the variance
         shall create an adverse impact on the health, safety, and welfare of persons or property
         affected. The applicant for a variance shall carry the burden of establishing that an adverse
         impact shall not be created by the granting of a variance.
     (2) Denial or revocation. The sole issue before the hearing officer shall be whether the conditions
         set out in a sound permit have been violated and whether the issuance or continuance of a
         permit will create an adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons or property
         affected by the violation. If the hearing officer determines that the violations of a permit created
         and adverse impact or were a violation of the permit a permit may be denied or revoked and/or
         the conditions of a permit may be reduced so as to eliminate the adverse impact.
     (3) The department, the person requesting the hearing and any person who feels adversely
         impacted by a sound permit may be represented by counsel, examine witnesses and present
         evidence.
     (4) The hearing officer shall issue a written determination to be sent to the applicant for the
         variance, the permit holder and/or the community development department director. A copy of
         the decision will be kept on file with the city clerk.
     (5) The proceedings at the administrative hearing shall be tape recorded by the hearing officer.
         Such tape recording and all exhibits entered shall serve as the official record of the
         administrative hearing for appeal purposes. The hearing officer shall retain the official record
         until the time for filing a notice of appeal has expired. If a notice of appeal is timely filed, the
         hearing officer shall retain the official record of the administrative hearing until the appeal has
         been acted upon.
(b) Should the hearing officer revoke the sound permit the property location will not be granted another
    sound permit for another six months from the date of the decision or final decision if appealed.

(O.14,746, 14,774)

Sec. 42-267. - Right of appeal.

      Any party aggrieved by a final determination made by an administrative hearing officer pursuant to
this article may challenge whether the officer exceeded proper jurisdiction or otherwise acted illegally by
commencing a certiorari action in the district court for Polk County, Iowa. The petition to initiate a
certiorari action must be filed within 30 days from the entry of the final determination unless an extension
of time is allowed by the reviewing court pursuant to Division XIV of the Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure.
The city manager is hereby authorized to initiate a certiorari action on behalf of the city when the city
manager, in consultation with the city attorney, deems it necessary and appropriate.

(O.14,746, 15,129)

Sec. 42-268. - Penalty.

     Any person who fails to perform an act required by the provisions of this article, or who commits an
act prohibited by the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor or a municipal
infraction punishable by a criminal or a civil penalty as provided by section 1-15.



                                                                                                    Page 16
(O.14,746)

Secs. 42-269—42-300. - Reserved.




                                   Page 17
