                      ORDINANCE NO. 14,746


AN ORDINANCE to amend the Municipal Code of the City of Des
    Moines, Iowa, 2000, adopted by Ordinance No. 13,827, passed
    June 5, 2000, by repealing Article IV, Noise Pollution,
    Sections 42-246 through 42-270 thereof and adding and
    enacting a new Article IV, Noise Control, Sections 42-246
    through 42-267.

Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Des Moines,
     Iowa:

    Section 1.    That the Municipal Code of the City of Des

Moines, Iowa, 2000, adopted by Ordinance No. 13,827, passed June

5, 2000, by repealing Article IV, Noise Pollution, Sections 42-

246 through 42-270 thereof and adding and enacting a new Article

IV, Noise Control, Sections 42-246 through 42-267, as follows:

                    ARTICLE IV. Noise Control

Sec. 42-246. Definitions.

     Definitions of technical terms used in this article which
are not defined in this section shall be obtained from
publications of acoustical terminology issued by the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. The
following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
     “Adverse Impact‖ shall mean such a state of facts as would
lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to conclude that the
economic, entertainment and philanthropic benefits to the
community do not reasonably outweigh the quiet use and enjoyment
of the affected property.
     ―Ambient sound level‖ means the noise associated with a
given environment, exclusive of a particular noise being tested,
being usually a composite of sounds from many sources near and
far, exclusive of intruding noises from isolated identifiable
sources.
     “A-weighted sound level‖ means the sound pressure level in
decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-
weighting network. The level is designated dB(a) or dBA.
     “Construction‖   means  any   site  preparation,   assembly,
erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action for
or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or
similar property.
     “Decibel (dB)‖ means a logarithmic and dimensionless unit
of measure often used in describing the amplitude of sound,
equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of
the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure,
which is 20 miscropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter).
     “Demolition‖ means any dismantling, intentional destruction
or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-
way surfaces, or similar property.
     “Emergency‖ means any occurrence or set of circumstances
involving actual or imminent physical or psychological trauma or
property damage which demands immediate action.
     “Emergency work‖ means any work performed for the purpose
of alleviating or resolving an emergency.
     “Equivalent A-weighted sound level (Leq)‖ means the constant
sound level that, in a given situation and time period, conveys
the same sound energy as the actual time-varying A-weighted
sound. For the purpose of this article, a time period of one
hour shall be used, unless the likely duration or intensity of
the sound being measured makes a shorter time period reasonable.
     “Impulsive sound‖ means sound of short duration, usually
less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.
Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop
forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms.
     “Motorboat‖ means any vessel which operates on water and
which is propelled by a motor, including but not limited to
boats, barges, amphibious craft, water ski towing devices and
hovercraft.
     “Motorcycle‖ means any motor vehicle having a saddle or
seat for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more
than three wheels in contact with the ground. The term includes
motorized bicycles and motor scooters.
     “Motor vehicle‖ means any motor-operated vehicle licensed
for use on the public highways, but not including a motorcycle.
     “Noise‖ means any sound which disturbs humans or which
causes   or  tends   to  cause   an   adverse    psychological or
physiological effect on humans.
     “Noise disturbance‖ means:
          1)   Any sound which unreasonably endangers or injures
          the health or safety or welfare of a human being; or
          2)   Any sound which unreasonably disturbs a person of
          normal sensitivities; or
          3)   Any sound which unreasonably devalues or injures
          personal or real property; or
          4)   Any Sound which is in excess of decibel levels
          set forth in this article.
          5)   The   factors   which   may    be    considered in
          determining whether a noise disturbance exists may
          include, but are not limited to:
               (a) The level of the noise;
                     (b) The   level    and    intensity    of    any
               background noise;
                     (c) Whether the nature of the noise is
               usual or unusual;
                     (d) Whether the origin of the noise is
               natural or unnatural;
                     (e) The proximity of the source of the
               noise to sleeping facilities;
                     (f) The land use, nature and zoning of the
               area from which the noise emanates and of the
               area where the noise is received;
                     (g) The time of day or night when the noise
               occurs;
                     (h) The duration of the noise;
                     (i) Whether   the     noise    is   recurrent,
               intermittent or constant.
     “Noise sensitive area‖ means any area designated pursuant
to section 42-263 of this article for the purpose of ensuring
exceptional quiet and clearly posted with noise sensitive area
signs, because of the noise sensitive activities conducted
therein.
     ―Notice of violation‖ shall include a notice of violation,
a civil infraction and/or a criminal citation.
     “Person‖ shall have the meaning prescribed by section 1-2
of this Code and, in addition, means and includes any officer,
employee, department, agency or instrumentality of the state or
any political subdivision of the state.
     “Person responsible” or “Responsible party‖ shall be the
owners, employees or acting managers, agents, contract buyers,
tenants, or lessees’ of all residential dwellings, commercial
establishments, and/or real estate upon which a violation of
this article is found and shall be jointly and severally
responsible for compliance with this article at any location.
     “Powered model vehicle‖ means any self-propelled airborne,
waterborne, or land borne model plane, vessel, or vehicle, which
is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to
any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
     “Public right-of-way‖ means any street, avenue, boulevard,
highway, sidewalk, or alley or similar place which is owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.
     “Public space‖ means any real property, including any
structure   thereon,   which  is  owned     or   controlled    by   a
governmental entity.
     “Pure tone‖ means any sound which can be distinctly heard
as a single pitch or a set of single pitches.
     “Real property boundary‖ means an imaginary line along the
ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the
real property owned by one person from that owned by another
person,   but   not   including   intra-building    real  property
divisions.
     “Receiving land‖ means the use or occupancy of the property
which receives the transmission of sound as defined in this
section.
     “Recreational vehicle‖ means any race car, motorcycle,
snowmobile, all terrain vehicles or any other motorized vehicle
equipped for use in racing or other recreational events or uses
off of public rights-of-way on public or private property. For
purposes of this article, a motor vehicle or motorized vehicle
which is taking part in an organized racing, endurance, or other
coordinated sporting event shall be deemed a recreational
vehicle and shall be governed by the terms of subsection 42-
259(C) of this article.
     “Residential‖ means any property on which is located a
building or structure used wholly or partially for living or
sleeping purposes. This definition shall not include park
custodial residences or school or college dormitories.
     “Sound‖   means   an   oscillation   in   pressure,  particle
displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in
a medium with internal forces that cause compression and
rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include
any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity
and frequency.
     “Sound equipment‖ means any radio, record player, stereo,
television, tape deck or player, loudspeaker, amplifier, sound
truck or other device for producing, reproducing, or amplifying
sounds.
     “Sound level‖ means the weighted sound pressure level
obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency
weighting network as specified in American National Standards
Institute specifications for sound level meters. If the
frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting
shall apply.
     “Sound level meter‖ means an instrument which includes a
microphone,   amplifier,   RMS   detector,   integrator  or   time
averager, output or display meter, and weighting networks used
to measure sound pressure levels, which complies with American
National Standards Institute standards.

Sec. 42-247. Title.

     This article may be cited as the "Noise Control Ordinance
of the City of Des Moines."

Sec. 42-248. Statement of public policy.

     The city council finds and declares that:
(A)   Excessive noise is a serious hazard to the public health
      and welfare and the quality of life in a close urban
      society.
(B)   A substantial body of science and technology exists by
      which excessive noise can be substantially abated without
      serious inconvenience to the public.
           (C) Certain    noise-producing    equipment   in    this
           community is essential to the quality of life in the
           community and should be allowed to continue at
           reasonable levels with moderate regulation.
(D)   Each person has a right to an environment reasonably free
      from   noise  which   jeopardizes   health  or   welfare   or
      unnecessarily degrades the quality of life.
(E)   It is the policy of this city to promote an environment
      free from excessive noise, which unnecessarily jeopardizes
      the health and welfare and degrades the quality of the
      lives of the residents of this community, without unduly
      prohibiting, limiting or otherwise regulating the function
      of certain noise-producing equipment which is not amenable
      to such controls and yet is essential to the economy and
      quality of life of the community.


Sec. 42-249. Purpose.

     The purpose of this article is to establish standards for
the control of excessive noise in the city by setting maximum
permissible sound levels for various activities to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare.

Sec. 42-250. Scope.

     This article shall apply to the control of all noise
originating   within  the   city   limits  or   originating   from
properties lying outside the city limits owned or controlled by
the city, except where either:
(A) A state or federal agency has adopted a different standard
     or rule than that prescribed within this article and has so
     preempted the regulation of noise from a particular source
     as to render this article inapplicable thereto; or
          (B) The city council has determined that, because of
          public   acceptance   of   the  activity   producing   a
          particular noise, such noise is deemed acceptable to
          the city residents.

Sec. 42-251. Exceptions to article.

      This article shall not apply to the following:
(A)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons
      to the existence of an emergency.
           (B) The emission of sound in the performance of
           emergency work.
(C)   Noncommercial    public   speaking   and   public    assembly
      activities conducted on any private property, public space,
      or public right-of-way, except those activities controlled
      by section 42-257 of this article.
           (D) The    un-amplified   human  voice,   except   those
           activities controlled by subsection 42-256(A) of this
           article.
(E)   Agricultural activities, exclusive of those involving the
      ownership or possession of animals or birds.
(F)        Snowmobiles regulated by I.C. ch. 321G.
       (G) Rail   and    air  transportation   and    public   mass
       transportation vehicles.
(H)   The emission of sound in connection with activities
      conducted on the state fairgrounds during the annual state
      fair and exposition.
(I)   The emission of sound in the performance of military
      operations, exclusive of travel by individuals to or from
      military duty.
(J)   The emission of sound in the legal discharge of weapons or
      in fireworks displays licensed by the city.
           (K) The emission of sound in the operation of snow
           removal equipment.
(L)   Parades or processions for which a parade permit has been
      issued by the city.
(M)     Marching bands and athletic events
(N)   Government owned, operated, or contracted vehicles in the
      performance of their official duties.

Sec. 42-252. Noise disturbance prohibited.

     No person shall make, continue or cause to be made         or
continued any noise disturbance as defined in this article.

Sec. 42-253. Ambient Noise Level

     When noise level measurements are taken and the ambient
noise level measurement exceeds the maximum permitted sound
level, the maximum permitted sound level shall be increased to
equal the ambient noise level.

Sec. 42-254. Maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land
use; immediate threat.

(A)   Maximum permissible sound levels. With the exception of
      sound levels elsewhere specifically authorized or allowed
      in this article, no person shall make, continue, or cause
      to be made or continued, any sound which exceeds the
      following sound level limits at or within the real property
      boundary of a receiving land use:

           TABLE 1. SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE

Zoning Category of      Time                  Sound Level
Receiving Land Use                            Limit, dBA

Residential zones:       7:00 a.m. to 10:00   60
R1-80 to R-6,R-HD       p.m.
and a residential       10:00 p.m. to 7:00    50
PUD                     a.m.
Mixed    use     and    At all times          65
commercial zones:
PUD to C-4
Industrial zones:       At all times          75
M-1 to M-3
Noise       sensitive   At all times          55
area
U-1 floodplain     or   At all times          65
FW floodway




           (1) For the purposes of this article, sound levels in
           excess of the dBA listed in table 1 shall be deemed a
           violation.
           (2) This subsection shall not apply to:
                a. Activities covered by the following sections
               of this article: 42-255 (emergency signaling
               devices);    42-258   (amplified   sound);   42-259
               (motorized vehicles); 42-260 (construction); 42-261
               (stationary non-emergency signaling devices); 42-
               266 (noise covered by sound variance).
                b. The operation of the following domestic power
               tools or equipment between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
               and 10:00 p.m.:
                                 1. Electrical power tools.
                                 2. Motor-powered,        muffler-
                      equipped lawn, garden and tree trimming
                      equipment.
(B)   Immediate threat.
                      (1) The official of any department charged
                with enforcement of this article shall order an
                immediate halt to any sound which exposes any
              person, except those excluded under subsection
              (2) of this section, to continuous sound levels
              in excess of those shown in table 2 or to
              impulsive sound levels in excess of those shown
              in table 3. If the sound has not abated within a
              reasonable length of time following issuance of
              such an order, the official of any department
              charged with enforcement of this article may
              apply to the appropriate court for an injunction
              to replace the order or may treat the violation
              in the manner of other Code violations.
         (2) No order under subsection (B)(1) of this section
         shall be issued if the only persons exposed to sound
         levels in excess of those listed in tables 2 and 3 are
         exposed as a result of:
                   a.   Trespass;
              b.   Invitation upon private property by the
             person causing or permitting the sound; or
              c.   Employment by the person or contractor of
             the person causing or permitting the sound.
         (3) Any person subject to an order issued pursuant to
         subsection (B)(1) of this section shall comply with
         such order until:
              a.   The sound is brought into compliance with
              the order as determined by the noise control
              division; or
                        b.   A judicial order has superseded
                   such order.

                     TABLE 2. CONTINUOUS SOUND LEVELS WHICH POSE
                AN
              IMMEDIATE THREAT TO HEALTH AND WELFARE
                       (Measured at 50 Feet)

Sound Level                      Duration
Limit (dBA)
 90                              24 hours

 93                              12 hours

 96                               6 hours

 99                               3 hours

102                              1.5 hours
105                              45 minutes

108                              22 minutes


          (5) Correction for character of sound. For any source
          of sound which emits a pure tone, the maximum sound
          level limits set forth in table 2 shall be reduced by
          five dBA.
          (6) Varying sound level. Where the sound level (dBA)
          varies over the measuring period, the equivalent A-
          weighted   (average)   sound  level   (Leq) shall  be
          determined by figuring the time and intensity levels
          for time periods set out in tables 2 and 3.

          TABLE 3. IMPULSIVE SOUND LEVELS WHICH POSE AN
              IMMEDIATE THREAT TO HEALTH AND WELFARE
                       (Measured at 50 Feet)

Sound Level                      Number of
Limit (dB)                       Repetitions
                                 Per 24-Hour
                                 Period

140                                1

130                               10

120                              100


Sec. 42-255. Emergency signaling devices.

(A)   No person shall operate or permit the intentional sounding
      outdoors of any fire, burglar, or civil defense alarm,
      siren, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling
      device, except for emergency purposes or for testing, as
      provided in subsection (b) of this section.
(B)   Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall
      occur at the same time of day each time the test is
      performed, but not before 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. Any
      such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In
      no case shall test times exceed 60 seconds.

Sec. 42-256. Specific activities prohibited.

(A)   Sales by hawking or barking. No person shall offer for sale
      or sell anything by shouting or raised voice within any
      residential or commercial area in the city.
(B)   Loading and unloading. No person shall so load, unload,
      open, close or handle boxes, crates, containers, building
      materials, garbage cans, or similar objects between the
      hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following morning as
      to create a noise disturbance across a residential real
      property boundary or within a noise sensitive area. This
      section shall not apply to activities covered by section
      42-259 of this article.
(C)   Vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing. No person shall
      repair, rebuild, modify, or test any motor vehicle,
      motorcycle, or motorboat in such a manner as to cause a
      noise disturbance across a residential real property
      boundary or outdoors within a noise sensitive area.
(D)   Powered model vehicles. No person shall operate or permit
      the operation of powered model vehicles in a public or
      private space out-of-doors or within a noise sensitive area
      between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following
      day.

Sec. 42-257. Musical instruments and similar devices.

     No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or
playing of any drum, musical instrument or similar device which
produces sound in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance
across a residential real property boundary as defined in
section 42-254 of this article or outdoors within a noise
sensitive area.

Sec. 42-258. Sound equipment and sound amplifying equipment.

(A)   Permit required. No person shall, use, operate or cause to
      be used or operated any sound equipment upon the public
      right-of-way or in any building or upon any premises,
      public or private, creating a noise disturbance unless such
      person:
           (1) First obtains a permit in accordance with this
           section;
           (2) Complies with the conditions imposed by the
           permit, including the maximum permitted sound level
           shown therein;
           (3) Complies with the provisions of chapter 102 of
           this Code, as it regulates street closings; and
           (4) Complies with all other applicable subsections of
           this section.
(B)   "Sound equipment" requiring a permit shall not include:
           (1) Equipment used for public health and safety
           purposes.
          (2) Church or clock carillons, bells or chimes.
          (3) Automobile or boat radios, tape decks or players,
          or other standard equipment used and intended for the
          use and enjoyment of the vehicle occupants, provided
          the sound emitting there from does not create a noise
          disturbance or does not violate section 42-259.
          (4) Un-amplified live music provided, sponsored, or
          funded, in whole or in part, by a governmental entity.
(C) Permit fees. A separate permit shall be required for each
     type of activity described in subsection (E) of this
     section, and permits shall be nontransferable. The permit
     shall be conspicuously displayed on or immediately adjacent
     to the sound equipment. A nonrefundable fee shall be paid
     in the amount set in the schedule of fees adopted by the
     City Council by resolution at the time of application for
     the sound permit.
(D) Information required on permit application. Application for
     the permit required in this section shall be made in
     writing to the zoning enforcement officer, accompanied by
     the required permit fee and the following information:
          (1) The type of permit requested.
     (2) The name and address of the applicant.
          (3) The purpose for which the sound equipment will be
          used.
          (4) The location where the sound equipment will be
          used.
          (5) Designation of the days of use and proposed hours
          of operation of the sound equipment.
          (6) A general description of the sound equipment,
          including the license number of any motor vehicle upon
          which it is to be operated.
          (7) The name(s) and phone number(s) of the person(s)
          responsible for the use of the permit.
     If the application contains the required information and is
accompanied by the required fee, and the proposed use of the
sound   equipment   complies  with   the   standards  and   other
requirements of this section and all other applicable laws and
ordinances, the zoning enforcement officer shall issue the
appropriate permit.
(E) Application standards. The following are general standards
     for the type of permit:
          (1) Type ―A‖ permit. A type “A” permit may be issued
          for sound equipment emitting music or human speech
          registering not more than 85 dBAs when measured at the
          real property boundary of the permitted property or at
          a distance of 50 feet from the sound equipment if
          issued in conjunction with a street closing. A type
          “A” permit may be issued only in areas of the city
          zoned for commercial and/or mixed use and only between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., except the C-3,
C-3R and DR zoned areas which shall be between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Sunday through
Thursday, and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00
a.m. on Friday and Saturday, the Sunday of Memorial
Day weekend, Labor Day weekend and the Fourth of July
should it fall on a Sunday. A type “A” permit will be
issued for a thirty day period to be used on eight
days during the permitted time, with the days of use
to be designated on the permit application.
(2) Type ―B‖ permit—parks located in residential
zones. A type “B” permit may be used for sound
equipment emitting music or human speech registering
not more than 65 dBAs when measured at the real
property boundary or at a distance of 50 feet from the
sound equipment, whichever distance is closer to the
sound equipment.    Sound equipment permitted under a
type “B” permit may be used only in public parks owned
and operated by the city or public grounds owned and
operated by another governmental body, located in a
residentially zoned district from 9:00 a.m. to the
time the park closes for events authorized and
approved by the park and recreation board or other
body having jurisdiction over the park or public
grounds. A type “B” permit will be issued for one day
up to one week with the days to be designated on the
permit application.
(3) Type ―C‖ permit—church or school grounds. A type
“C” permit may be issued for sound equipment emitting
music or human speech registering not more than 65
dBAs when measured at the real property boundary or
when measured at a distance of 50 feet from the sound
equipment, whichever distance is closer to the sound
equipment. Sound equipment permitted under a type “C”
permit may be used only on church grounds, school
grounds, or in conjunction with a school sponsored
activity, from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. for events
authorized and approved by the church or school
authorities having jurisdiction of the grounds.      A
type “C” permit will be issued for one day up to one
week with the days to be designated on the permit
application.
(4) Type ―D‖ permit--residential events. A type “D”
permit may be issued for sound equipment emitting
music or human speech registering not more than 65
dBAs when measured at the real property boundary of
the permitted property or 50 feet from the sound
equipment,   whichever   distance  is   closer.  Sound
equipment permitted under a type “D” permit may be
           used only pursuant to a permitted street closing under
           chapter 102 of this Code, from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
           A type “D” permit will be issued for one day up to one
           week with the days to be designate on the permit
           application.
           (5) Type ―E‖ permit – background sound equipment.    A
           type “E” permit may be issued for sound equipment to
           be used in an outdoor area in conjunction with an
           approved business use emitting music or human speech,
           excluding live music, registering not more then 65
           dBAs, or below the ambient level, when measured at the
           property boundary, edge of designated seating area or
           50 feet from the sound equipment which ever is closer.
           Sound equipment permitted under a type “E” permit may
           be used only during regular hours of business
           operation. A type “E” permit will be issued up to one
           year.
(F)   Commercial advertising.     No sound equipment shall be
      permitted to be used on public streets or public places or
      in any building or upon any premises if the sound may be
      plainly audible from any public street or public place
      within the city when any such use is for commercial
      advertising purposes or for the purpose of attracting the
      attention of the public to any building or structure for
      monetary gain.
(H)   Denial or revocation.
           (1) Denial of sound permit. The director of the
           community development department may, upon hearing,
           deny an application for a sound permit if any person
           responsible for monitoring the terms and conditions of
           the sound permit at the premises has been issued two
           or more notices of violation of this article in a
           previous 12-month period, the director shall forward
           the information to the city clerk to schedule a
           hearing for consideration of denial of the sound
           permit.
           (2) Revocation.    The   director  of   the  community
           development department may, upon hearing, revoke a
           sound permit issued pursuant to this article upon the
           second notice of violation issued in a twelve month
           period to persons responsible for monitoring the terms
           and conditions of the sound permit, the director shall
           forward the information to the city clerk to schedule
           a hearing for consideration of revocation of the sound
           permit.
           (3) Revocation    hearing-adverse   impact.   If   the
           director of the community development department
           receives written statements or a petition from 25
           percent or more of the occupants of single family or
          duplex residences and the owner or manager of multiple
          residence structures including hotels, who claim to be
          adversely   affected   by   the  operation   of   sound
          amplification equipment under a valid sound permit and
          who live within 200 feet measured from property line
          to property line of the property where such sound
          permit is valid, the director shall forward the
          information to the city clerk to schedule a hearing
          for consideration of revocation of the sound permit.


Sec. 42-259. Motorized vehicles.

(A)   No person shall operate the engine, or auxiliary engine, of
      a motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight
      rating of 10,000 pounds or more for a period longer than 20
      minutes while such vehicle is standing and located within
      150 feet of property zoned and used for residential
      purposes. This subsection shall not apply to delivery or
      pickup vehicles that require the operation of the engine to
      unload or load their vending loads.
(B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or a combination of
      vehicles of a type subject to registration at any time or
      under any condition in such manner as to exceed the noise
      limit listed in this subsection for the category of motor
      vehicle, such noise to be measured at a distance of fifty
      (50) feet from the vehicle.

                    NOISE LIMIT IN RELATION TO
                         LEGAL SPEED LIMIT

Type of Vehicle         35 mph              Over
                        or Less             35 mph
                        dBA                 dBA

Any motor vehicle       88                  92
with                a
manufacturer's
gross         vehicle
weight    rating   of
10,000 lbs. or more
and any combination
of vehicles towed
by     such     motor
vehicle
Any motorcycle          82                  86
Any   other    motor   76                   82
vehicle   and    any
combination       of
motor       vehicles
towed by such motor
vehicle

This subsection applies to the total noise from a vehicle or
combination of vehicles and shall not be construed as limiting
or precluding the enforcement of any other section of this Code
relating to motor vehicle mufflers or noise control.
(C)       (1) No person shall operate a recreational vehicle or
          permit the operation of one or more recreational
          vehicles, individually or in a group, or in an
          organized racing event on public or private property
          in such a manner that the sound level exceeds that set
          forth in Sec. 42-254(A) Table 1.
          (2) No person shall operate or permit the operation
          of any recreational vehicle(s), on public or private
          land between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
          (3) This section shall not apply to recreational
          vehicles when legally operated upon the public
          streets.
(D) No person operating or in control of a motor vehicle,
     recreational vehicle, watercraft, or vessel shall operate
     or permit the operation of a sound system in the vehicle so
     as to produce a vibration or sound that is clearly
     detectable at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the
     vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or
     clearly detectable at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet
     from the vehicle between the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 7:00
     a.m.

Sec. 42-260. Construction.

     No person shall operate or permit the operation of any
tools or equipment in construction, drilling or demolition work
or in preventive maintenance work for public service utilities
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

Sec. 42-261. Stationary non-emergency signaling devices.

(A)   No person shall operate or permit the sounding of any
      stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device,
      intended primarily for non-emergency purposes, from any
      place for more than one minute in any hourly period.
(B)   Devices used in conjunction with places of religious
      worship shall be exempt from the operation of this section.
Sec. 42-262. Animals and birds.

     No person shall own, possess or harbor any animal or bird
which frequently or for continued duration emits sounds native
to the species which are a noise disturbance across a
residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive
area.

Sec. 42-263. Enforcement.

(A)   The noise control program established by this article shall
      be implemented, administered, and enforced by the community
      development and police departments.
(B)   The sections of this article which prohibit the making,
      continuing, or causing the making or continuing of a noise
      disturbance across a real property boundary or within a
      noise sensitive area shall be enforced upon receipt of
      complaint made or filed with city officials by a person
      disturbed by such noise disturbance or by direction of the
      chief of police or his or her designee. Certification by an
      official charged with enforcement of this article that such
      complaint was made shall be sufficient to establish the
      fact of such complaint.
(C)   To implement and enforce this article, the community
      development department and the police department shall have
      the additional power to:
           (1) Conduct research, monitoring, and other studies
           related to sound.
           (2) Upon presentation of proper credentials, enter
           and inspect any private property or place and inspect
           any report or records at any reasonable time when
           granted permission by the owner or by some other
           person with apparent authority to act for the owner.
           (3) Issue sound variances pursuant to section 42-264
           of this article.
           (4) Deny sound permits or seek a revocation of a
           sound permit.
      (5) Prepare recommendations for consideration by the city
           council, after publication of notice and public
           hearing, for establishing the boundaries of noise
           sensitive areas.
           (6) The sound source or any component thereof may be
           impounded pending the resolution of any violations
           charged under this article.
(D)   The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a
      sound level meter meeting the standards prescribed by the
      American National Standards Institute or its successor
      body. Measurements shall be taken so as to be in compliance
      with the specifications for a valid test as set out by the
      product manufacture. Training will be administered by the
      product manufacture representative or any departmental
      employee(s) who has attended such training.

Sec. 42-264. Application for sound variances.

(A)   Any person desiring to exceed the permitted sound levels or
      the number of days a permit is valid for as set out in this
      article may apply to the community development department
      for a variance from such regulations.
(B)   All applicants for such variances shall apply in writing to
      the community development department. Such application
      shall be submitted at least 30 days prior to the proposed
      date for the needed sound permit variance.
(C)   All variance applications shall contain the following
      information:
           (1) The name and address of the applicant;
           (2) If the application is made on behalf of an
           organization,    the   name   and   address   of   that
           organization;
           (3) The name and phone number of a contact person;
           (4) The proposed dates for which a variance is
           required;
           (5) A description of the event and its potential
           cause for excessive noise;
           (6) The times the event will generate excessive
           noise; and
           (7) Information which would demonstrate that bringing
           the source of sound or activity for which the sound
           permit variance is sought into compliance would
           constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant,
           on the community, or on other persons.
(D)   An application for a sound permit variance shall be
      submitted    to   the   community   development   department
      accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $100.00 to cover the
      cost of processing the application.
(E)   Upon receipt of an application for a sound permit variance,
      the director of the community development department or his
      or her designee shall determine what property interests may
      be affected by the granting of a sound permit variance,
      including but not limited to:
           (1) The occupants of surrounding single-family or
           duplex residences located in an area that includes the
           next two homes in any direction or those within 200
           feet of the noise source, whichever is less; or
           (2) The    owner   or  manager   of  multiple-residence
           structures, including hotels, within such areas.
(F)   The director of the community development department shall
      notify such property owners or occupants as identified in
      subsection (E) of this section in writing and delivered by
      the U.S. Postal Service, ordinary mail, of the application
      for a sound permit variance and shall give them ten days to
      give written cause why the variance should not be granted.
(G)   If the director of the community development department
      receives written statements from 25 percent or more
      occupants who claim to be adversely affected by allowance
      of the sound permit variance, the director shall forward
      the information to the city clerk to schedule an
      administrative hearing to consider the application for a
      variance.

Sec. 42-265. Scheduling of hearing on sound variances denials
and revocations.

     The City Clerk, upon receipt from the director of the
community development department of a request for a hearing on a
sound variance, or a denial or a revocation of a sound permit,
shall schedule a hearing as soon as is practical and shall send
by the regular U.S. Postal Service a notice of the time, date
and location of the hearing to the applicant, the permit holder
and/or all persons who filed an adverse impact statement and all
property owners previously notified at least ten (10) days prior
to the hearing.

Sec. 42-266. Conduct of administrative         hearing   on   sound
variances denials and permit revocations.

(A)   The administrative hearing shall be conducted before the
      hearing officer designated by the city manager.
           (1) Variance.     The sole issue before the hearing
           officer shall be whether the granting of the variance
           shall create an adverse impact on the health, safety,
           and welfare of persons or property affected. The
           applicant for a variance shall carry the burden of
           establishing that an adverse impact shall not be
           created by the granting of a variance.
           (2) Denial or Revocation.     The sole issue before the
           hearing officer shall be whether the conditions set
           out in a sound permit have been violated and whether
           the issuance or continuance of a permit will create an
           adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of
           persons or property affected by the violation. If the
           hearing officer determines that the violations of a
           permit created and adverse impact or were a violation
           of the permit a permit may be denied or revoked and/or
           the conditions of a permit may be reduced so as to
           eliminate the adverse impact.
           (3) The department, the person requesting the hearing
           and any person who feels adversely impacted by a sound
           permit   may  be   represented   by  counsel,   examine
           witnesses and present evidence.
           (4) The hearing officer shall issue a written
           determination to be sent to the applicant for the
           variance, the permit holder and/or the community
           development department director.       A copy of the
           decision will be kept on file with the city clerk.
      (5) The proceedings at the administrative hearing shall be
           tape recorded by the hearing officer. Such tape
           recording and all exhibits entered shall serve as the
           official record of the administrative hearing for
           appeal purposes. The hearing officer shall retain the
           official record until the time for filing a notice of
           appeal has expired. If a notice of appeal is timely
           filed, the hearing officer shall retain the official
           record of the administrative hearing until the appeal
           has been acted upon.
(B)   Should the hearing officer revoke the sound permit the
      property location will not be granted another sound permit
      for another six (6) months from the date of the decision or
      final decision if appealed.

Sec. 42-267.   Right of appeal of hearing officer’s decision and
process.

(A)   The decision of the hearing officer under this article may
      be appealed to the city council by either the director of
      the community development department, the applicant for the
      revoked or denied permit, the applicant for a sound
      variance, or any impacted resident, provided that such
      entity or person files a written notice of appeal with the
      city clerk’s office within seven days of the hearing
      officer’s decision.   Failure to file a written notice of
      appeal within such period shall be deemed a waiver of the
      right to appeal the hearing officer’s decision to the city
      council.
(B)   The appeal of the decision of the hearing officer shall be
      considered and a decision rendered by the city council
      within 14 days of the filing of the written notice of
      appeal.    The time for considering the appeal may be
      extended for good cause. The appeal process shall consist
      of a review by the city council of the transcript of the
      tape recorded record of the administrative hearing.      No
      additional evidence may be presented as part of the appeal.
      The sole issue before the council shall be whether the
      decision of the hearing officer was supported by sufficient
      evidence. The decision of the city council is final.
Sec. 42-268. Penalty.

     Any person who fails to perform an act required by the
provisions of this article, or who commits an act prohibited by
the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a simple
misdemeanor or a municipal infraction punishable by a criminal
or a civil penalty as provided by section 1-15.

    Sec. 2.      This ordinance shall be in full force and effect

from and after its passage and publication as provided by law.

FORM APPROVED:



Douglas P. Philiph, Assistant City Attorney

T.M. Franklin Cownie, Mayor



Attest:

         I, Diane Rauh, City Clerk of the City of Des Moines,
    Iowa, hereby certify that the above and foregoing is a true
    copy of an ordinance (Roll Call No. 08-329), passed by the
    City Council of said City at a meeting held February 25,
    2008 signed by the Mayor on February 25, 2008 and published
    as provided by law in the Business Record on March 10,
    2008. Authorized by Publication Order No. 6056.




                               Diane Rauh, City Clerk
