                                    ORDINANCE NO. 16,064

AN ORDINANCE to amend the Municipal Code of the City of Des Moines, Iowa, 2000, adopted
     by Ordinance No. 13,827, passed June 5, 2000, as heretofore amended, by amending
     Chapter 42 Article VI, Sections 42-246 and 42-258, relating to noise regulations.

Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Des Moines, Iowa:

        Section 1. That the Municipal Code of the City of Des Moines, Iowa, 2000, adopted by

Ordinance No. 13,827, passed June 5, 2000, as heretofore amended, by amending Chapter 42

Article VI, Sections 42-246 and 42-258, relating to noise regulations, as follows:

Sec. 42-246. Definitions.

.....

       “Downtown areas” shall mean the areas designated for sound permits described below as
depicted in Figure 42-246.1 downtown areas.

 Figure 42-246.1 Downtown areas.




            Area 1(Top)–the area which is bounded by these streets: On the west by 5th Avenue, on
        the north by the southernmost Interstate 235 freeway entrance ramp roadway that runs east
        and west between 5th Avenue and 2nd Avenue, on the east by 2nd Avenue, and on the south
        by Park Street.
            Area 2 (Middle) – the area bounded by these streets: On the west by 15th Street; on the
        north by Grand Avenue; on the east by the segment of Pennsylvania Avenue between
        Grand Avenue and East Walnut Avenue; on the southeast by the one block segment of East
        Walnut East 6th Street that runs east-west between East 7th Street and East 6th Street, and
        on the southeast by the one block segment of East 6th Street that is between is between
        East Walnut Avenue and East Court Avenue; on the south by the segment of East Court
        Avenue between East 6th Street and 5th Avenue, by the one block segment of 5th Avenue
        between Court Avenue and Mulberry Street, and by the segment of Mulberry between 5 th
        Avenue and 15th Street.
            Area 3 (Bottom) – the area bounded as follows: on the south side by the north bank of
        the Raccoon River; on the east side by the west bank of the Des Moines River; on the north
        by the segment of East Martin Luther King, Jr. Parkway that runs east-west from the west
        bank of the Des Moines River to SW 3rd Street; and on the west by the segment of SW 3rd
        Street that runs north-south between East Martin Luther King, Jr. Parkway and the north
        bank of the Raccoon River.
        “East Village Street Colures area” shall mean the areas designated for sound permits in
East village in connection with the street closure event within the area depicted in Figure 42-246.2
East Village Street closure area boundaries.

Figure 42-246.2




       “East Village noise control area” shall mean the area designate for sound permits for
properties that are not within 250 feet of a residential dwelling, within the area depicted in Figure
42-246.3 East Village noise control area boundaries.
Figure 42-246.3




....


Sec. 42-258. Sound equipment, sound amplifying equipment and construction equipment.

....

(f)    Application standards. The following are general standards for the type of permit:
       (1)    Type “A” permit. A type “A” permit may be issued for sound equipment emitting
              live music, reproduced music or human speech registering not more than 85 dBCs
              when measured at the real property boundary of the permitted property or at a
              distance of 50 feet from the sound equipment if issued in conjunction with a street
              closing. A type “A” permit may be issued only in areas of the city zoned for
              industrial, commercial and/or mixed use and only between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
              and 10:00 p.m., except in the downtown areas and East Village Street Closure area,
              which shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through
              Thursday, and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:30 a.m. on Friday and
              Saturday, the Sunday of Memorial Day weekend, Labor Day weekend and the
              Fourth of July should it fall on a Sunday. A type “A” permit will be issued for a
              thirty-day period, commencing on the first of each month, to be used on eight days
              during the permitted time, with the days of use to be designated on the permit
              application.
       (2)    Type “B” permit—parks located in residential zones. A type “B” permit may be
              used for sound equipment emitting music or human speech registering not more
              than 65 dBCs when measured at the real property boundary or at a distance of 50
              feet from the sound equipment, whichever distance is closer to the sound
              equipment. Sound equipment permitted under a type “B” permit may be used only
              in public parks owned and operated by the city or public grounds owned and
              operated by another governmental body, located in a residentially zoned district
      from 9:00 a.m. to the time the park closes for events authorized and approved by
      the park and recreation board or other body having jurisdiction over the park or
      public grounds. A type “B” permit will be issued for one day up to one week with
      the days to be designated on the permit application.
(3)   Type “C” permit—church or school grounds. A type “C” permit may be issued for
      sound equipment emitting music or human speech registering not more than 65
      dBCs when measured at the real property boundary or when measured at a distance
      of 50 feet from the sound equipment, whichever distance is closer to the sound
      equipment. Sound equipment permitted under a type “C” permit may be used only
      on church grounds, school grounds, or in conjunction with a school sponsored
      activity, from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. for events authorized and approved by the
      church or school authorities having jurisdiction of the grounds. A type “C” permit
      will be issued for one day up to one week with the days to be designated on the
      permit application.
(4)   Type “D” permit--residential events. A type “D” permit may be issued for sound
      equipment emitting music or human speech registering not more than 65 dBCs
      when measured at the real property boundary of the permitted property or 50 feet
      from the sound equipment, whichever distance is closer. Sound equipment
      permitted under a type “D” permit may be used only pursuant to a permitted street
      closing under chapter 102 of this Code, from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. A type “D”
      permit will be issued for one day up to one week with the days to be designate on
      the permit application.
(5)   Type “E” permit – background sound equipment. A type “E” permit may be issued
      for a commercially zoned area, mixed use zoned area, East Village noise control
      area or a commercially zoned PUD or PBP area for sound equipment to be used in
      an outdoor area in conjunction with an approved business use emitting music or
      human speech, excluding live music, registering not more than 65 dBCs, or below
      the ambient level, when measured at the property boundary, edge of designated
      seating area or 50 feet from the sound equipment whichever is closer. Sound
      equipment permitted under a type “E” permit may be used only during regular hours
      of business operation. A type “E” permit will be issued up to one year.
(6)   Type “F” permit – Brenton Skating Plaza. A type “F” permit may be issued for
      sound equipment in the Brenton Skating Plaza, in conjunction with a lease
      agreement entered into with the Parks and Recreation Department emitting music
      or human speech, registering not more than 112 dBCs, at the front of house which
      is established to be 75 feet from the sound. This permit is effective between the
      hours of 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 9:00 a.m. to 11:00
      p.m. on Friday and Saturday, the Sunday of Memorial Day weekend, Labor Day
      weekend and the Fourth of July should it fall on a Sunday.
(7)   Type “G” permit-Special Event Live Performances. A type “G” permit may be
      issued for sound amplification equipment to be used for live performances where
      the sound from music or human speech does not exceed 112 dBCs when measured
      50 feet from the amplification equipment and meets all of the following criteria:
      a.      The special event or live performance is located in the Downtown areas and
              the East Village Steet Closure area,
      b.      This type permit will only be issued two times per year per address to
              include a street closing abutting the sponsoring business and only if 30 days
                has elapsed from the effective date of a previous type “G” permit for the
                same location, however, if the street closing is sponsored by the Court
                Avenue Business Association, Downtown Community Alliance, Historic
                East Village, or any other community organization affiliated with
                businesses located in the downtown areas this type permit is not limited in
                number or time span,
       c.       If the applicant has no address in the downtown areas, then either a business
                in the area, or a community organization affiliated with businesses located
                in the downtown area must sponsor the event,
       d.       This type permit may not be issued if another type “G” permit has already
                been issued within 1,000 feet of a given location and covering the same time
                on any day. If the event has multiple stages in the designated event only
                one permit will be required.
       e.       When used in conjunction with a street closure this type permit will not be
                issued until the street use team approves the street closure,
       f.       This type permit must be obtained at least 7 days prior to the performance
                unless pending street use team approval.
       g.       This type permit is effective for up to three consecutive days and for the
                hours of 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 9:00 a.m. to
                12:30 a.m. on Friday and Saturday, the Sunday of Memorial Day weekend,
                Labor Day weekend and the Fourth of July should it fall on a Sunday.
       h.       A variance may be sought in accordance with this article if any of the
                requirements for issuance of this type permit wish to be modified on a case
                by case basis.
(8)    Type “H” permit-Farmer’s Market. A type “H” permit may be issued to Farmer’s
       Markets which have a street closure for sound amplification equipment allowing
       music up to 85 dBCs for the duration of the street closure.
(9)    Type “I” permit- Waterworks Park – Lauridsen Amphitheater. A type “I” permit
       may be issued for amplification equipment for live performances held in
       Waterworks Park, at the Lauridsen Amphiltheater, emitting music or human
       speech, at a level not greater than 114 dBCs measured at front of house which will
       be set at 125 feet from the stage. A type “I” permit is effective for one or two days
       and for the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and
       between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday, the Sunday
       of Memorial Day weekend, Labor Day weekend and the Fourth of July should it
       fall on a Sunday.
(10)   Type “J” permit – night construction. A type “J” permit may be issued for
       residential construction activities beyond the hours permitted under section 42-260.
       A type “J” permit may be issued for construction performed on behalf of a nonprofit
       or philanthropic organization where such construction activity is to be completed
       in an expedited manner pursuant to a construction schedule which has been
       approved by the community development director and has been determined to
       advance the overall welfare of city residents, provided that the residential structure
       is being built for occupation by low or moderate income persons. Application for
       a type “J” permit shall be processed pursuant to sections 42-264 through 42-267 of
       this article.
(11)   Type “K” permit may be issued for an event whose route is on city streets, trails
       and/or other public right-of-way with the permit to be valid one hour before the
       start of the event and at specifically approved locations along the route that would
       otherwise comply with all other provisions of this article.
(12)   Type “L” permit may be issued to a privately held recreational area more than 40
       acres in area for outside events, emitting music or human speech at a level not
       greater than 112 dBCs when measured 50 feet from the amplification equipment.
       This permit is effective between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Sunday
       through Thursday and 9:00 a.m. to 12:30 a.m. on Friday and Saturday, the Sunday
       of Memorial Day weekend, the Sunday of Labor Day weekend, and the Fourth of
       July whenever it occurs on a Sunday. The stage and sound equipment for any live
       performances held shall be set up facing away from residential areas. A type “L”
       permit will be issued for a thirty-day period, commencing on the first of each
       month, to be used on eight days during the permitted time, with the days of use to
       be designated on the permit application.
(13)   Type “M” permit Zoo and Water Works Park. A type “M” permit may be issued
       for amplification equipment for live performances held on the Blank Park Zoo
       Foundation Parcel and Water Works Park field, emitting music or human speech,
       114 dBCs measured at front of house which will be 125 feet from the state and
       limited to 85 dBCs when measured at the nearest residence. A type “M” permit is
       effective for one or two days and for the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Sunday
       through Thursday, and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Friday
       and Saturday, the Sunday of Memorial Day weekend, Labor Day weekend and the
       Fourth of July should it fall on a Sunday. The stage and sound equipment for any
       live performances held on the Blank Park Zoo Foundation Parcel shall be set up
       facing the south causing the sound to be directed towards the Blank Park Zoo and
       the Blank Golf Course. For the purpose of this subsection, Blank Park Zoo
       Foundation Parcel means the tract owned by Blank Park Zoo Foundation located
       south of Army Post Road and east of SW 9th Street, and designated for tax purposes
       as Polk County district/parcel number 120/00324-005-001. Additionally, the stage
       and sound equipment for any live performances held in the field in Waterworks
       Park shall be set up facing the northeast causing he sound to be directed through
       the park and away from residential areas.
(14)   Type “N” permit – Simon Estes Riverfront Amphitheater. A type “N” permit may
       be issued for sound equipment to be used in the Simon Estes Riverfront
       Amphitheater in conjunction with a lease agreement entered into with the Parks and
       Recreation Department, emitting music or human speech, registering not more than
       100 dBCs, when measured at the middle cement crosswalk. This permit is effective
       between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 9:00
       a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday, the Sunday of Memorial Day weekend,
       Labor Day weekend and the Fourth of July should it fall on a Sunday.
(15)   Type “O” permit – Riverview Amphitheater. The type permit may be issued for
       sound equipment in the Riverview Amphitheater, in conjunction with a lease
       agreement entered into with the Parks and Recreation Department, emitting music
       or human speech, registering not more than 105 dBC 50 feet from the speakers
       which shall be the established front of house for purposes of noise control
       measurements. This permit is effective between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
               p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday,
               the Sunday of Memorial Day weekend, Labor Day weekend and the Fourth of July
               should it fall on a Sunday.
       (16)    Type “P” Permit - Botanical Center. A type “P” permit may be issued for sound
               equipment on the Botanical Center grounds, registering not more than 112 dBCs,
               at the front of house which is established to be 75 feet from the sound. This permit
               is effective between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday
               and 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday, the Sunday of Memorial Day
               weekend, Labor Day weekend and the Fourth of July should it fall on a Sunday.

....

       Section 2. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and

publication as provided by law.



FORM APPROVED:


_________________________
Judy K. Parks-Kruse
Assistant City Attorney

T. M. Franklin Cownie, Mayor


Attest: I, P. Kay Cmelik, City Clerk of the City of Des Moines, Iowa, hereby certify that the above
and foregoing is a true copy of an Ordinance (Roll Call No. 21-1620), passed by the City Council
of said City at the meeting held on October 18, 2021 and signed by the Mayor on October 18, 2021
and published and provided by law in the Business Record on November 5, 2021 Authorized by
Publication Order No. 11704.


P. Kay Cmelik, City Clerk
